---
id: 5164
title: D2
date: 2015-12-06T03:21:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/12/06/12266868/
permalink: /?p=5164
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
<div>
  Tentamen i kursen Distribuerade System &#8211; TDDB 37, 2006-03-11, kl. 8-12
</div>

<div>
  Du kan skriva på svenska eller engelska!
</div>

<div>
  LINKÖPINGS TEKNISKA HÖGSKOLA
</div>

<div>
  Institutionen för datavetenskap
</div>

<div>
  Petru Eles
</div>

<div>
  Tentamen i kursen
</div>

<div>
  Distribuerade System- TDDB 37
</div>

<div>
  2006-03-11, kl. 8-12
</div>

<div>
  Hjälpmedel: Supporting material:
</div>

<div>
  Engelsk ordbok. English dictionary.
</div>

<div>
  Poänggränser: Points:
</div>

<div>
  Maximal poäng är 40. Maximum points: 40.
</div>

<div>
  För godkänt krävs sammanlagt In order to pass the exam you need a
</div>

<div>
  21 poäng. total of minimum 21 points.
</div>

<div>
  Jourhavande lärare:
</div>

<div>
  Alexandru Andrei, tel. 0704607095
</div>

<div>
  Good luck !!!
</div>

<div>
  Tentamen i kursen Distribuerade System &#8211; TDDB 37, 2006-03-11, kl. 8-12
</div>

<div>
  Du kan skriva på svenska eller engelska!
</div>

<div>
  1. What means transparency in a distributed system? We have defined seven aspects of
</div>

<div>
  transparency. Enumerate and explain at least five of them.
</div>

<div>
  (3p)
</div>

<div>
  2. What is an Interface Definition Language? What is its function in the context of Middleware?
</div>

<div>
  (2p)
</div>

<div>
  3. What are potential problems with client-server systems?
</div>

<div>
  How are they solved with peer-to-peer systems?
</div>

<div>
  What are key issues and problems with peer-to-peer systems?
</div>

<div>
  (3p)
</div>

<div>
  4. Remote Method Invocation: trace the way of a request and of the reply from the client to a
</div>

<div>
  remote server and back. Illustrate with a figure.
</div>

<div>
  (3p)
</div>

<div>
  5. What is a cut of a distributed computation? What means a consistent and a strongly consistent cut? Consider the following set of events:
</div>

<div>
  Determine for each of the following cuts if it inconsistent, consistent or strongly consistent:
</div>

<div>
  {c2, c6, c8}, {c1, c4, c7}, {c1, c5, c7}, {c1, c6, c8}, {c1, c6, c7}, {c3, c6, c8}.
</div>

<div>
  (3p)
</div>

<div>
  P
</div>

<div>
  1
</div>

<div>
  P
</div>

<div>
  2
</div>

<div>
  P
</div>

<div>
  3
</div>

<div>
  c1 c2 c3
</div>

<div>
  c4 c5 c6
</div>

<div>
  c7 c8
</div>

<div>
  Tentamen i kursen Distribuerade System &#8211; TDDB 37, 2006-03-11, kl. 8-12
</div>

<div>
  Du kan skriva på svenska eller engelska!
</div>

<div>
  6. Consider the following set of events:
</div>

<div>
  Assign the missing vector clock values to the events.
</div>

<div>
  (3p)
</div>

<div>
  7. What is the basic idea behind the token based distributed mutual exclusion algorithm by
</div>

<div>
  Ricart-Agrawala (the second algorithm)? Consider how mutual exclusion is guaranteed and
</div>

<div>
  how the token is passed after a process has left the critical section. How many messages are
</div>

<div>
  passed in order a process to get permission to a critical section? Compare to the first algorithm by Ricart-Agrawala (which is not using a token).
</div>

<div>
  (3p)
</div>

<div>
  8.
</div>

<div>
  a. Define total and causal ordering of requests. Illustrate by an example.
</div>

<div>
  b. How can total ordering be implemented using a central sequencer?
</div>

<div>
  c. Consider total ordering based on distributed agreement (no central sequencer); consider one
</div>

<div>
  front end and several replication managers, like below:
</div>

<div>
  a
</div>

<div>
  P
</div>

<div>
  1
</div>

<div>
  P
</div>

<div>
  2
</div>

<div>
  P
</div>

<div>
  3
</div>

<div>
  b
</div>

<div>
  f g
</div>

<div>
  j k
</div>

<div>
  (1, 0, 0)
</div>

<div>
  c
</div>

<div>
  h
</div>

<div>
  d
</div>

<div>
  e i
</div>

<div>
  (0, 1, 0)
</div>

<div>
  (0, 0, 1)
</div>

<div>
  Tentamen i kursen Distribuerade System &#8211; TDDB 37, 2006-03-11, kl. 8-12
</div>

<div>
  Du kan skriva på svenska eller engelska!
</div>

<div>
  Three messages have to be exchanged by the FE with each RM. Explain. What do these messages contain?
</div>

<div>
  (3p)
</div>

<div>
  9.
</div>

<div>
  a. Define majority voting for forward recovery.
</div>

<div>
  Illustrate by two examples: one with strict equality and the other with non-strict equality.
</div>

<div>
  b. Illustrate by examples k-plurarity voting and median voting.
</div>

<div>
  (3p)
</div>

<div>
  10. Define a k-fault tolerant system.
</div>

<div>
  How many components do you need in order to achieve k-fault tolerance with byzantine
</div>

<div>
  faults:
</div>

<div>
  &#8211; for agreement?
</div>

<div>
  &#8211; with a majority voting scheme?
</div>

<div>
  (2p)
</div>

<div>
  RM
</div>

<div>
  1
</div>

<div>
  FE RM2
</div>

<div>
  RM
</div>

<div>
  3
</div>

<div>
  Tentamen i kursen Distribuerade System &#8211; TDDB 37, 2006-03-11, kl. 8-12
</div>

<div>
  Du kan skriva på svenska eller engelska!
</div>

<div>
  11. The Byzantine Generals Problem: show how agreement is not or is possible for three and for
</div>

<div>
  four generals respectively, in the case one of the generals (not the commander) is a traitor (illustrate the exchange of messages with figures).
</div>

<div>
  (3p)
</div>

<div>
  12. Cristian’s algorithm for clock synchronization. Describe how it works. How does it estimate
</div>

<div>
  the time at the receiver? What is the accuracy of this estimation?
</div>

<div>
  (3p)
</div>

<div>
  13. Adjusting drifted clocks: Tcurr is the time shown by the clock and Tnew is the value we have
</div>

<div>
  to change the clock to.
</div>

<div>
  a) What is the main problem and how is it solved in principle?
</div>

<div>
  b) Concrete solution with mathematical discussion.
</div>

<div>
  (4p)
</div>

<div>
  14. Compare the Ethernet protocol and the CAN protocol from the point of view of
</div>

<div>
  predictability. Explain.
</div>

<div>
  (2p)
</div>