---
id: 339
title: 'INFORMATION  SYSTEMS SECURITY  Lecture 2 part 4– Threat/Vulnerability Assessments and Risk Analysis'
date: 2015-03-25T08:03:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/03/25/9699073/
permalink: /2015/03/25/9699073/
swp_pinterest_image_url:
  - ""
swp_cache_timestamp:
  - "419230"
post_views_count:
  - "136"
bs_social_share_facebook:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_twitter:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_reddit:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_google_plus:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_linkedin:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_interval:
  - "1567961455"
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
Comparing the Two Approaches  
Both qualitative and quantitative approaches to security risk management have their advantages and disadvantages. Certain situations may call for organizations to adopt the quantitative approach. The following table summarizes the benefits and drawbacks of each approach:  
&nbsp;  
&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Quantitative&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Qualitative&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;  
Benefits&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Risks are prioritized by financial impact; assets are prioritized by financial values.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Results facilitate management of risk by return on security investment.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Results can be expressed in management-specific terminology (for example, monetary values and probability expressed as a specific percentage).  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Accuracy tends to increase over time as the organization builds historic record of data while gaining experience.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Enables visibility and understanding of risk ranking.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Easier to reach consensus.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Not necessary to quantify threat frequency.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Not necessary to determine financial values of assets.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Easier to involve people who are not experts on security or computers.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;  
Drawbacks&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Impact values assigned to risks are based on subjective opinions of participants.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Process to reach credible results and consensus is very time consuming.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Calculations can be complex and time consuming.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Results are presented in monetary terms only, and they may be difficult for non-technical people to interpret.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Process requires expertise, so participants cannot be easily coached through it.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Insufficient differentiation between important risks.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Difficult to justify investing in control implementation because there is no basis for a cost-benefit analysis.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Results are dependent upon the quality of the risk management team that is created.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;

In past years, the quantitative approaches seemed to dominate security risk management; however, that has changed recently as more and more practitioners have admitted that strictly following quantitative risk management processes typically results in difficult, long-running projects that see few tangible benefits.

It is advisable that when developing an information security Program consider  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;The ISO 17799 standard for IT security,  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;the ITIL framework for IT process management,  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;other relevant standards (such as the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard v1.1),  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;the Software Engineering Institute Capability Maturity Model (CMM) and  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Best practices framework for security program development.