---
id: 84
title: 'DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS: LECTURE 1'
date: 2015-11-04T11:45:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/11/04/11942250/
permalink: /2015/11/04/11942250/
swp_pinterest_image_url:
  - ""
swp_cache_timestamp:
  - "419230"
post_views_count:
  - "148"
bs_social_share_facebook:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_twitter:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_reddit:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_google_plus:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_linkedin:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_interval:
  - "1567296734"
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
<span style="font-size:small;">Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 1<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS</strong><br />(TDDD25)<br />Petru Eles<br />Institutionen för Datavetenskap (IDA)<br />Linköpings Universitet<br />email: <a href="mailto:petel@ida.liu.se">petel@ida.liu.se</a><br />http://www.ida.liu.se/~petel<br />phone: 28 1396<br />B building, 329:220<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 2<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Course Information</strong><br />Web page: http://www.ida.liu.se/~TDDD25<br />Examination: written<br />Lecture notes: available from the web page, latest 24<br />hours before the lecture.<br />Text book:<br />George Coulouris, Jean Dollimore, Tim Kindberg:<br />&#8220;Distributed Systems &#8211; Concepts and Design&#8221;,<br />Addison Wesley Publ. Comp., 4th edition, 2005.<br />George Coulouris, Jean Dollimore, Tim Kindberg,<br />Gordon Blair: &#8220;Distributed Systems &#8211; Concepts and<br />Design&#8221;, Addison Wesley Publ. Comp., 5th edition,<br />2011.<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 3<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Course Information (cont’d)</strong><br />Labss&Lessons:<br />Ivan Ukhov<br />Institutionen för Datavetenskap (IDA)<br />email: <a href="mailto:ivan.ukhov@liu.se">ivan.ukhov@liu.se</a><br />B building, 329:232<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 4<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS</strong><br /><strong>Basic Issues</strong><br /><strong>1. What is a Distributed System?</strong><br /><strong>2. Examples of Distributed Systems</strong><br /><strong>3. Advantages and Disadvantages</strong><br /><strong>4. Design Issues with Distributed Systems</strong><br /><strong>5. Course Topics</strong><br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 5<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>What is a Distributed System?</strong><br />A <strong>distributed system</strong> is a collection of autonomous<br />computers linked by a computer network that appear to<br />the users of the system as a single computer.<br />Some comments:<br />• System architecture: the machines are<br />autonomous; this means they are computers which,<br />in principle, could work independently;<br />• The user’s perception: the distributed system is<br />perceived as a single system solving a certain<br />problem (even though, in reality, we have several<br />computers placed in different locations).<br />By running a <em>distributed system software</em> the computers<br />are enabled to:<br />&#8211; coordinate their activities<br />&#8211; share resources: hardware, software, data.<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 6<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Examples of Distributed Systems</strong><br />Network of workstations<br />• Personal workstations + processors not assigned to<br />specific users.<br />• Single file system, with all files accessible from all<br />machines in the same way and using the same<br />path name.<br />• For a certain command the system can look for the<br />best place (workstation) to execute it.<br />Workstations<br />Local area network<br />Gateway to<br />Wide Area<br />Network<br />File servers<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 7<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Examples of Distributed Systems (cont’d)</strong><br />Automatic banking (teller machine) system<br />• Primary requirements: security and reliability.<br />• Consistency of replicated data.<br />• Concurrent transactions (operations which involve<br />accounts in different banks; simultaneous access<br />from several users, etc).<br />• Fault tolerance<br />Bank_1 data<br />Bank_2 data<br />Bank_1 backup<br />Bank_2 backup<br />Teller<br />machines<br />Teller<br />machines<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 8<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Examples of Distributed Systems (cont’d)</strong><br />The cloud<br />• Computing as a utility: application, storage,<br />computing services; pay on per-usage basis.<br />• Main concerns: scaling, performance, security/<br />reliability.<br />Internet<br />Clients<br />Services<br />Applications<br />Storage<br />Computation<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 9<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Examples of Distributed Systems (cont’d)</strong><br />Automotive system (a distributed real-time system)<br />Input/Output<br />Network Interf.<br />Actuators Sensors<br />Gateway<br />Gateway<br />RAM<br />CACHE<br />CPU<br />FPGA<br />Safety critical network<br />Non-safety critical high-speed network<br />Non-safety critical low-speed network<br />Entertainment network<br />Anti-lock<br />breaking<br />Adaptive<br />cruise<br />control<br />X-by wire<br />Engine control Trottle control<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 10<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Examples of Distributed Systems (cont’d)</strong><br />Distributed Real-Time Systems<br />• Synchronization of physical clocks<br />• Scheduling with hard time constraints<br />• Real-time communication<br />• Fault tolerance<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 11<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Why do we Need Them?</strong><br /><strong>Advantages of Distributed Systems</strong><br />Performance: very often a collection of processors can<br />provide higher performance (and better<br />price/performance ratio) than a<br />centralized computer.<br />Distribution: many applications involve, by their nature,<br />spatially separated machines (banking,<br />commercial, automotive system).<br />Reliability (fault tolerance): if some of the machines<br />crash, the system can survive.<br />Incremental growth: as requirements on processing<br />power grow, new machines can be added<br />incrementally.<br />Sharing of data/resources: shared data is essential to<br />many applications (banking, computersupported cooperative work, reservation<br />systems); other resources can be also<br />shared (e.g. expensive printers).<br />Communication: facilitates human-to-human<br />communication.<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 12<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Disadvantages of Distributed Systems</strong><br />Difficulties of developing distributed software: how<br />should operating systems, programming<br />languages and applications look like?<br />Networking problems: several problems are created by<br />the network infrastructure, which have to<br />be dealt with: loss of messages,<br />overloading, &#8230;<br />Security problems: sharing generates the problem of<br />data security.<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 13<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Design Issues with Distributed Systems</strong><br />Design issues that arise <em>specifically</em> from the distributed<br />nature of the application:<br />• Transparency<br />• Communication<br />• Performance & scalability<br />• Heterogeneity<br />• Openness<br />• Reliability & fault tolerance<br />• Security<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 14<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Transparency</strong><br />☞ How to achieve the single system image?<br />☞ How to &#8220;fool&#8221; everyone into thinking that the collection<br />of machines is a &#8220;simple&#8221; computer?<br />• Access transparency<br />&#8211; local and remote resources are accessed using<br />identical operations.<br />• Location transparency<br />&#8211; users cannot tell where hardware and software<br />resources (CPUs, files, data bases) are located; the name of the resource shouldn’t encode<br />the location of the resource.<br />• Migration (mobility) transparency<br />&#8211; resources should be free to move from one<br />location to another without having their names<br />changed.<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 15<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Transparency (cont’d)</strong><br />• Replication transparency<br />&#8211; the system is free to make additional copies of<br />files and other resources (for purpose of<br />performance and/or reliability), without the<br />users noticing.<br />Example: several copies of a file; at a certain<br />request that copy is accessed which is the<br />closest to the client.<br />• Concurrency transparency<br />&#8211; the users will not notice the existence of other<br />users in the system (even if they access the<br />same resources).<br />• Failure transparency<br />&#8211; applications should be able to complete their<br />task despite failures occurring in certain<br />components of the system.<br />• Performance transparency<br />&#8211; load variation should not lead to performance<br />degradation.<br />This could be achieved by automatic<br />reconfiguration as response to changes of the<br />load; it is difficult to achieve.<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 16<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Communication</strong><br />☞ Components of a distributed system have to<br />communicate in order to interact. This implies<br />support at two levels:<br />1. Networking infrastructure (interconnections &<br />network software).<br />2. Appropriate communication primitives and models<br />and their implementation:<br />• communication primitives:<br /><em>&#8211; send</em><br /><em>&#8211; receive</em><br /><em>&#8211; remote procedure call</em> (RPC)<br />• communication models<br /><em>&#8211; client-server communication</em>: implies a<br />message exchange between two processes: the process which requests a service and the one which provides it;<br />&#8211; <em>group muticast</em>: the target of a message is<br />a set of processes, which are members of<br />a given group.<br />message passing<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 17<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Performance and Scalability</strong><br />Several factors are influencing the performance of a<br />distributed system:<br />• The performance of individual workstations.<br />• The speed of the communication infrastructure.<br />• Extent to which reliability (fault tolerance) is<br />provided (replication and preservation of coherence<br />imply large overheads).<br />• Flexibility in workload allocation: for example, idle<br />processors (workstations) could be allocated<br />automatically to a user’s task.<br />Scalability<br />The system should remain efficient even with a<br />significant increase in the number of users and<br />resources connected:<br />&#8211; cost of adding resources should be reasonable;<br />&#8211; performance loss with increased number of<br />users and resources should be controlled;<br />&#8211; software resources should not run out (number<br />of bits allocated to addresses, number of<br />entries in tables, etc.)<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 18<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Heterogeneity</strong><br />☞ Distributed applications are typically heterogeneous:<br />&#8211; different hardware: mainframes, workstations,<br />PCs, servers, etc.;<br />&#8211; different software: UNIX, MS Windows, IBM OS/2,<br />Real-time OSs, etc.;<br />&#8211; unconventional devices: teller machines,<br />telephone switches, robots, manufacturing<br />systems, etc.;<br />&#8211; diverse networks and protocols: Ethernet,<br />FDDI, ATM, TCP/IP, Novell Netware, etc.<br />The solution<br /><em>Middleware</em>, an additional software layer to mask<br />heterogeneity<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 19<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Openness</strong><br />☞ One of the important features of distributed systems<br />is openness and flexibility:<br />&#8211; every service is equally accessible to every<br />client (local or remote);<br />&#8211; it is easy to implement, install and debug new<br />services;<br />&#8211; users can write and install their own services.<br />☞ Key aspect of openness:<br />&#8211; Standard interfaces and protocols (like Internet<br />communication protocols)<br />&#8211; Support of heterogeneity (by adequate<br /><em>middleware</em>, like CORBA)<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 20<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Openness (cont’d)</strong><br />Software Architecture:<br />Applications & Services<br />Middleware<br />Operating System<br />Hardware: Computer&Network<br />&#8220;the platform&#8221;<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 21<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Openness (cont’d)</strong><br />The same, looking at two distributed nodes:<br />Operating<br />System<br />Hardware:<br />Comp.&Netw.<br />platform 1<br />Applications & Services<br />Middleware<br />Operating<br />System<br />Hardware:<br />Comp.&Netw.<br />platform 2<br />Node 1 Node 2<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 22<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Reliability and Fault Tolerance</strong><br />☞ One of the main goals of building distributed systems<br />is improvement of reliability.<br /><strong>Availability</strong>:If machines go down, the system should work<br />with the reduced amount of resources.<br />• There should be a very small number of critical<br />resources (single points of failure);<br /><em>critical resources</em>: resources which have to be up in<br />order the distributed system to work.<br />• Key pieces of hardware and software (critical<br />resources) should be replicated ⇒ if one of them<br />fails another one takes up &#8211; <em>redundancy</em>.<br />Data on the system must not be lost, and copies stored<br />redundantly on different servers must be kept <strong>consistent</strong>.<br />• The more copies kept, the better the availability, but<br />keeping consistency becomes more difficult.<br /><strong>Fault-tolerance</strong> is a main issue related to reliability: the<br />system has to detect faults and act in a reasonable way:<br />• <em>mask the fault</em>: continue to work with possibly<br />reduced performance but without loss of data/<br />information.<br />• <em>fail gracefully</em>: react to the fault in a predictable way<br />and possibly stop functionality for a short period,<br />but without loss of data/information.<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 23<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Security</strong><br />Security of information resources:<br />1. <strong>Confidentiality</strong><br />Protection against disclosure to unauthorised person<br />2. <strong>Integrity</strong><br />Protection against alteration and corruption<br />3. <strong>Availability</strong><br />Keep the resource accessible<br />The appropriate use of resources by different users has<br />to be guaranteed.<br />Distributed systems should allow<br />communication between programs/users/<br />resources on different computers.<br />Security risks associated with free access.<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 24<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Course Topics at a Glance</strong><br />Basics<br />• Introduction<br />• Models of Distributed Systems<br />• Communication in Distributed Systems<br />Middleware<br />• Distributed Heterogeneous Applications and CORBA<br />• Peer-to-Peer Systems<br />Theoretical Aspects/Distributed Algorithms<br />• Time and State in Distributed Systems<br />• Distributed Mutual Exclusion<br />• Election and Agreement<br />Distributed Data and Fault Tolerance<br />• Replication<br />• Recovery and Fault Tolerance<br />Distributed Real-Time Systems<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 25<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Course Topics</strong><br />• Introduction<br />&#8211; just finished!<br />• Models of distributed systems<br />• Communication in Distributed Systems<br />&#8211; Message passing and the client/server model<br />&#8211; Remote Procedure Call<br />&#8211; Group Communication<br />&#8211; Publish-Subscribe Systems<br />• Distributed Heterogeneous Applications and CORBA<br />&#8211; Heterogeneity in distributed systems<br />&#8211; Middleware<br />&#8211; Objects in distributed systems<br />&#8211; The CORBA approach<br />• Peer-to-Peer Systems<br />&#8211; Basic design issues<br />&#8211; The Napster file sharing system<br />&#8211; BitTorrent<br />• Time and State in Distributed Systems<br />&#8211; Time in distributed systems<br />&#8211; Logical clocks & Vector clocks<br />&#8211; Causal ordering of messages<br />&#8211; Global states and state recording<br />Distributed Systems Fö 1 &#8211; 26<br />Petru Eles, IDA, LiTH<br /><strong>Course Topics (cont’d)</strong><br />• Distributed Mutual Exclusion<br />&#8211; Mutual exclusion in distributes systems<br />&#8211; Non-token based algorithms<br />&#8211; Token based algorithms<br />&#8211; Distributed elections<br />• Replication<br />&#8211; Motivation for replication<br />&#8211; Consistency and ordering<br />&#8211; Total and causal ordering<br />&#8211; Update protocols and voting<br />• Recovery and Fault Tolerance<br />&#8211; Transaction recovery<br />&#8211; Checkpointing and recovery<br />&#8211; Fault tolerance in distributed systems<br />&#8211; Hardware and software redundancy<br />&#8211; Byzantine agreement<br />• Distributed Real-Time Systems<br />&#8211; Physical Clocks<br />&#8211; Clock Synchronization<br />&#8211; Real-Time Scheduling<br />&#8211; Real-Time Communication<br /></span><br class="Apple-interchange-newline" />