---
id: 346
title: ISO 9000, ISO 9001 REVIEW IN SOFTWARE DEVELOPNENT
date: 2015-03-24T05:18:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/03/24/9682467/
permalink: /2015/03/24/9682467/
swp_pinterest_image_url:
  - ""
swp_cache_timestamp:
  - "419230"
post_views_count:
  - "181"
bs_social_share_facebook:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_twitter:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_reddit:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_google_plus:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_linkedin:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_interval:
  - "1565839448"
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
The ISO 9000 family addresses various aspects of quality management and contains some of ISO’s best known standards. The standards provide guidance and tools for companies and organizations who want to ensure that their products and services consistently meet customer’s requirements, and that quality is consistently improved. Standards in the ISO 9000 family include: ISO 9001:2008 &#8211; sets out the requirements of a quality management system ISO 9000:2005 &#8211; covers the basic concepts and language ISO 9004:2009 &#8211; focuses on how to make a quality management system more efficient and effective ISO 19011:2011 &#8211; sets out guidance on internal and external audits of quality management systems. ISO 9001:2008 ISO 9001:2008 sets out the criteria for a quality management system and is the only standard in the family that can be certified to (although this is not a requirement). It can be used by any organization, large or small, regardless of its field of activity. In fact ISO 9001:2008 is implemented by over one million companies and organizations in over 170 countries. This standard is based on a number of quality management principles including a strong customer focus, the motivation and implication of top management, the process approach and continual improvement. These principles are explained in more detail in the pdf Quality Management Principles. Using ISO 9001:2008 helps ensure that customers get consistent, good quality products and services, which in turn brings many business benefits. Certification to ISO 9001:2008 Checking that the system works is a vital part of ISO 9001:2008. An organization must perform internal audits to check how its quality management system is working. An organization may decide to invite an independent certification body to verify that it is in conformity to the standard, but there is no requirement for this. Alternatively, it might invite its clients to audit the quality system for themselves. Read more about certification to management system standards