---
id: 342
title: 'INFORMATION  SYSTEMS SECURITY LECTURE 1  PART I: Key concepts in Information Security'
date: 2015-03-25T07:23:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/03/25/9698632/
permalink: /2015/03/25/9698632/
swp_pinterest_image_url:
  - ""
swp_cache_timestamp:
  - "424953"
view_num:
  - "1"
post_views_count:
  - "416"
bs_social_share_facebook:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_twitter:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_reddit:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_google_plus:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_linkedin:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_interval:
  - "1570336946"
dsq_thread_id:
  - "7278736564"
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
Information security is the practice of defending information from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, perusal, inspection, recording or destruction.  
It is also defined as preservation of confidentiality, integrity and availability of information. Other properties, such as authenticity, accountability, non-repudiation and reliability can also be involved.  
Two major aspects of information security are:  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;IT security: (Also computer security), It is responsible for keeping all of the technology within the company secure from malicious cyber attacks that often attempt to breach into critical private information or gain control of the internal systems.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Information assurance: The act of ensuring that data is not lost when critical issues arise. These issues include: natural disasters, computer/server malfunction, physical theft, or any other instance where data has the potential of being lost.

Basic principles  
Confidentiality  
&nbsp;Is a set of rules or a promise that limits access or places restrictions on certain types of information.  
Confidentiality refers to limiting information access and disclosure to authorized users &#8212; &#8220;the right people&#8221; &#8212; and preventing access by or disclosure to unauthorized ones &#8212; &#8220;the wrong people.&#8221;  
Authentication methods like user-IDs and passwords, that uniquely identify data systems&#8217; users and control access to data systems&#8217; resources,&nbsp;underpin the goal of confidentiality.

Integrity  
Data integrity means maintaining and assuring the accuracy and consistency of data over its entire life-cycle.  
Data cannot be modified in an unauthorized or undetected manner.  
Integrity is violated when a message is actively modified in transit.

Availability  
This means that the computing systems used to store and process the information, the security controls used to protect it, and the communication channels used to access it must be functioning correctly.  
High availability systems aim to remain available at all times, preventing service disruptions due to power outages, hardware failures, and system upgrades.  
Ensuring availability involves preventing denial-of-service attacks, such as a flood of incoming messages to the target system essentially forcing it to shut down.

Non-repudiation  
It implies that one party of a transaction cannot deny having received a transaction nor can the other party deny having sent a transaction.

Prevention vs. detection  
Security efforts to assure confidentiality, integrity and availability can be divided into  
those oriented to prevention and  
those focused on detection whose aim is to rapidly discover and correct lapses that could not be &#8212; or at least were not &#8212; prevented.  
It is critical to remember that &#8220;appropriate&#8221; or &#8220;adequate&#8221; levels of confidentiality, integrity and availability depend on the context, just as does&nbsp;the appropriate balance between prevention and detection.  
The nature of the efforts that the information systems support; the natural, technical and human risks to those endeavors; governing legal, professional and customary standards &#8212; all of these will condition how CIA standards are set in a particular situation.

Common Terms  
Risk is the likelihood that something bad will happen that causes harm to an informational asset (or the loss of the asset).  
Vulnerability is a weakness that could be used to endanger or cause harm to an informational asset.  
A threat is anything (manmade or act of nature) that has the potential to cause harm.  
The likelihood that a threat will use a vulnerability to cause harm creates a risk. When a threat does use a vulnerability to inflict harm, it has an impact  
Impact is a loss of availability, integrity, and confidentiality, and possibly other losses (lost income, loss of life, loss of real property). It should be pointed out that it is not possible to identify all risks, nor is it possible to eliminate all risk. The remaining risk is called &#8220;residual risk&#8221;.  
A risk assessment is carried out by a team of people who have knowledge of specific areas of the business.

The risks in information systems  
Physical loss of data. You may lose immediate access to your data for reasons ranging from floods to loss of electric power. You may also lose access to your data for more subtle reasons: the second disk failure, for example, while your RAID array recovers from the first.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Unauthorized access to your own data and client or customer data. Remember, if you have confidential information from clients or customers, you’re often contractually obliged to protect that data as if it were your own.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Interception of data in transit. Risks include data transmitted between company sites, or between the company and employees, partners, and contractors at home or other locations.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Your data in someone else’s hands. Do you share your data with third parties, including contractors, partners, or your sales channel? What protects your data while it is in their hands?  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Data corruption. Intentional corruption might modify data so that it favors an external party: think Trojan horses or keystroke loggers on PCs. Unintentional corruption might be due to a software error that overwrites valid data.  
Email Interception  
Email Spoofing  
Web Data Interception  
Network & Volume Invasion  
Marketing Data / Spam & Junk Mail  
Viruses, Worms, Trojan Horses  
Password Cracking  
Mail bomb  
Denial of Service (DoS)  
Piracy of Intellectual Property

Information Security Principles of Success  
1.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;There Is No Such Thing as Absolute Security &#8211; Given enough time, tools, skills, and inclination, a hacker can break through any security measure  
2.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;CIA triad &#8211; Protect the confidentiality of data  
3.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Defense in depth &#8211; Security implemented in overlapping layers that provide the three elements needed to secure assets: prevention, detection, and response. The weaknesses of one security layer are offset by the strengths of two or more layers  
4.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;When Left on Their Own, People Tend to Make the Worst Security Decisions &#8211; Takes little to convince someone to give up their credentials in exchange for trivial or worthless goods.  
Many people are easily convinced to double-click on the attachment  
5.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Functional and Assurance Requirements &#8211; Functional requirements &#8211; Describe what a system should do.  
Assurance requirements &#8211; Describe how functional requirements should be implemented and tested

Does the system do the right things in the right way?  
Verification: the process of confirming that one or more predetermined requirements or specifications are met  
Validation: a determination of the correctness or quality of the mechanisms used in meeting the needs  
6.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Security Through Obscurity Is Not an Answer &#8211;&nbsp; Many people believe that if hackers don’t know how software is secured, security is better. Although this seems logical, it’s actually untrue. Obscuring security leads to a false sense of security, which is often more dangerous than not addressing security at all  
7.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Security = Risk Management:- Security is not concerned with eliminating all threats within a system or facility but with eliminating known threats and minimizing losses if an attacker succeeds in exploiting a vulnerability.  
Risk analysis and risk management are central themes to securing information systems.  
Risk assessment and risk analysis are concerned with placing an economic value on assets to best determine appropriate countermeasures that protect them from losses  
8.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Security Controls:&nbsp; Preventative, Detective, and Responsive &#8211; A security mechanism serves a purpose by preventing a compromise, detecting that a compromise or compromise attempt is underway, or responding to a compromise while it is happening or after it has been discovered.  
9.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Complexity Is The Enemy of Security: The more complex a system gets, the harder it is to secure  
10.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Fear, Uncertainty, and Doubt (FUD) Do Not Work in Selling Security: Information security managers must justify all investments in security using techniques of the trade.  
11.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;When spending resources can be justified with good, solid business rationale, security requests are rarely denied  
12.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;People, process, and technology controls are essential elements of security practices including operations security, applications development security, physical security, and cryptography  
13.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Open Disclosure of Vulnerabilities Is Good for Security:- Keeping a given vulnerability secret from users and from the software developer can only lead to a false sense of security. The need to know trumps the need to keep secrets in order to give users the right to protect themselves  
14.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Computer security specialists must not only know the technical side of their jobs but also must understand the principles behind information security

These principles are mixed and matched to describe why certain security functions and operations exist in the real world of IT

Exercise  
What are the elements of a good security program?  
Why is it difficult to secure information systems?