---
id: 338
title: 'INFORMATION  SYSTEMS SECURITY  Lecture 2 Last PART– Threat/Vulnerability Assessments and Risk Analysis'
date: 2015-03-25T08:53:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/03/25/9699743/
permalink: /2015/03/25/9699743/
swp_pinterest_image_url:
  - ""
swp_cache_timestamp:
  - "424953"
post_views_count:
  - "136"
bs_social_share_facebook:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_twitter:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_reddit:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_google_plus:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_linkedin:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_interval:
  - "1568664625"
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
<span style="font-family:Verdana;">Security Risk Management Practices</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Comparing Approaches to Risk Management</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Many organizations are introduced to security risk management by the necessity of responding to a relatively small security incident. Whatever the incident, as more and more issues relating to security arise and begin to impact the business, many organizations get frustrated with responding to one crisis after another. They want an alternative to this reactive approach, one that seeks to reduce the probability that security incidents will occur in the first place. Organizations that effectively manage risk evolve toward a more proactive approach, but this is only part of the solution.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">The Reactive Approach</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Security incidents may help an organization to predict and prepare for future problems. This means that an organization that takes time to respond to security incidents in a calm and rational manner while determining the underlying reasons that allowed the incident to transpire will be better able to both protect itself from similar problems in the future and respond more quickly to other issues that may arise.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Today, many information technology (IT) professionals feel tremendous pressure to complete their tasks quickly with as little inconvenience to users as possible. When a security event occurs, many IT professionals feel like the only things they have time to do are to contain the situation, figure out what happened, and fix the affected systems as quickly as possible. Some may try to identify the root cause, but even that might seem like a luxury for those under extreme resource constraints. While a reactive approach can be an effective tactical response to security risks that have been exploited and turned into security incidents, imposing a small degree of rigor to the reactive approach can help organizations of all types to better use their resources.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">The following six steps help when you are responding to security incidents quickly and efficiently:</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">1.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Protect human life and people&#8217;s safety. This should always be your first priority. For example, if affected computers include life support systems, shutting them off may not be an option; perhaps you could logically isolate the systems on the network by reconfiguring routers and switches without disrupting their ability to help patients.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">2.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Contain the damage. Containing the harm that the attack caused helps to limit additional damage. Protect important data, software, and hardware quickly. Minimizing disruption of computing resources is an important consideration, but keeping systems up during an attack may result in greater and more widespread problems in the long run. If you determine that there will be no adverse effects, or that they would be outweighed by the positive benefits of activity, containment should begin as quickly as possible during a security incident by disconnecting from the network the systems known to be affected. If you cannot contain the damage by isolating the servers, ensure that you actively monitor the attacker’s actions in order to be able to remedy the damage as soon as possible. And in any event, ensure that all log files are saved before shutting off any server.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">3.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Assess the damage. Immediately make a duplicate of the hard disks in any servers that were attacked and put those aside for forensic use later. Then assess the damage. You should begin to determine the extent of the damage that the attack caused as soon as possible, right after you contain the situation and duplicate the hard disks. This is important so that you can restore the organization&#8217;s operations as soon as possible while preserving a copy of the hard disks for investigative purposes. If it is not possible to assess the damage in a timely manner, you should implement a contingency plan so that normal business operations and productivity can continue. It is at this point that organizations may want to engage law enforcement regarding the incident; however, you should establish and maintain working relationships with law enforcement agencies that have jurisdiction over your organization&#8217;s business before an incident occurs so that when a serious problem arises you know whom to contact and how to work with them. You should also advise your company’s legal department immediately, so that they can determine whether a civil lawsuit can be brought against anyone as a result of the damage.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">4.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Determine the cause of the damage. In order to ascertain the origin of the assault, it is necessary to understand the resources at which the attack was aimed and what vulnerabilities were exploited to gain access or disrupt services. Review the system configuration, patch level, system logs, audit logs, and audit trails on both the systems that were directly affected as well as network devices that route traffic to them. These reviews often help you to discover where the attack originated in the system and what other resources were affected. You should conduct this activity on the computer systems in place and not on the backed up drives created in step 3. Those drives must be preserved intact for forensic purposes so that law enforcement or your lawyers can use them to trace the perpetrators of the attack and bring them to justice. If you need to create a backup for testing purposes to determine the cause of the damage, create a second backup from your original system and leave the drives created in step 3 unused.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">5.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Repair the damage. In most cases, it is very important that the damage be repaired as quickly as possible to restore normal business operations and recover data lost during the attack. The organization&#8217;s business continuity plans and procedures should cover the restoration strategy. The incident response team should also be available to handle the restore and recovery process or to provide guidance on the process to the responsible team. During recovery, contingency procedures are executed to limit the spread of the damage and isolate it. Before returning repaired systems to service be careful that they are not reinfected immediately by ensuring that you have mitigated whatever vulnerabilities were exploited during the incident.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">6.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Review response and update policies. After the documentation and recovery phases are complete, you should review the process thoroughly. Determine with your team the steps that were executed successfully and what mistakes were made. In almost all cases, you will find that your processes need to be modified to allow you to handle incidents better in the future. You will inevitably find weaknesses in your incident response plan. This is the point of this after-the-fact exercise—you are looking for opportunities for improvement. Any flaws should prompt another round of the incident-response planning process so that you can handle future incidents more smoothly.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">This methodology is illustrated in the following diagram:</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">The Proactive Approach</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Instead of waiting for incidences then respond, you minimize the possibility of the incidences ever occurring in the first place. You make plans to protect your organization&#8217;s important assets by implementing controls that reduce the risk of vulnerabilities being exploited by malicious software, attackers, or accidental misuse. Each of the security risk management methodologies shares some common high-level procedures:</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">1.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Identify business assets.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">2.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Determine what damage an attack against an asset could cause to the organization.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">3.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Identify the security vulnerabilities that the attack could exploit.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">4.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Determine how to minimize the risk of attack by implementing appropriate controls.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Approaches to Risk Prioritization</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">There are many different methodologies for prioritizing or assessing risks, but most are based on one of two approaches or a combination of the two: quantitative risk management or qualitative risk management.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Quantitative Risk Assessment</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">In quantitative risk assessments, the goal is to try to calculate objective numeric values for each of the components gathered during the risk assessment and cost-benefit analysis. Where you estimate the true value of each business asset in terms of what it would cost to replace it, what it would cost in terms of lost productivity, what it would cost in terms of brand reputation, and other direct and indirect business values. You endeavor to use the same objectivity when computing asset exposure, cost of controls, and all of the other values that you identify during the risk management process.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Weaknesses of this method:-</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; There is no formal and rigorous way to effectively calculate values for assets and controls.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Organizations that have tried to meticulously apply all aspects of quantitative risk management have found the process to be extremely costly. Such projects usually take a very long time to complete their first full cycle, and they usually involve a lot of staff members arguing over the details of how specific fiscal values were calculated.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; For organizations with high value assets, the cost of exposure may be so high that you would spend an exceedingly large amount of money to mitigate any risks to which you were exposed. This is not realistic, though; an organization would not spend its entire budget to protect a single asset, or even its top five assets.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Qualitative Risk Assessment</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">You calculate relative values in this method. Risk analysis is usually conducted through a combination of questionnaires and collaborative workshops involving people from a variety of groups within the organization such as information security experts; information technology managers and staff; business asset owners and users; and senior managers. The questionnaires are designed to discover what assets and controls are already deployed, and the information gathered can be very helpful during the workshops that follow. The information security experts and the system administrators typically come up with controls to mitigate the risks for the group to consider and the approximate cost of each control. Finally, the results are presented to management for consideration during a cost-benefit analysis.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">The basic process for qualitative assessments is very similar to what happens in the quantitative approach. The difference is in the details. Comparisons between the value of one asset and another are relative, and participants do not invest a lot of time trying to calculate precise financial numbers for asset valuation. The benefits of a qualitative approach are that it overcomes the challenge of calculating accurate figures for asset value, cost of control and the process is much less demanding on staff.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Comparing the Two Approaches</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Both qualitative and quantitative approaches to security risk management have their advantages and disadvantages. Certain situations may call for organizations to adopt the quantitative approach. The following table summarizes the benefits and drawbacks of each approach:</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">&nbsp;</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Quantitative&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Qualitative&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Benefits&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Risks are prioritized by financial impact; assets are prioritized by financial values.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Results facilitate management of risk by return on security investment.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Results can be expressed in management-specific terminology (for example, monetary values and probability expressed as a specific percentage).</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Accuracy tends to increase over time as the organization builds historic record of data while gaining experience.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Enables visibility and understanding of risk ranking.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Easier to reach consensus.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Not necessary to quantify threat frequency.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Not necessary to determine financial values of assets.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Easier to involve people who are not experts on security or computers.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">Drawbacks&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Impact values assigned to risks are based on subjective opinions of participants.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Process to reach credible results and consensus is very time consuming.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Calculations can be complex and time consuming.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Results are presented in monetary terms only, and they may be difficult for non-technical people to interpret.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Process requires expertise, so participants cannot be easily coached through it.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Insufficient differentiation between important risks.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Difficult to justify investing in control implementation because there is no basis for a cost-benefit analysis.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Results are dependent upon the quality of the risk management team that is created.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">In past years, the quantitative approaches seemed to dominate security risk management; however, that has changed recently as more and more practitioners have admitted that strictly following quantitative risk management processes typically results in difficult, long-running projects that see few tangible benefits.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">It is advisable that when developing an information security Program consider</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The ISO 17799 standard for IT security,</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; the ITIL framework for IT process management,</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; other relevant standards (such as the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard v1.1),</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; the Software Engineering Institute Capability Maturity Model (CMM) and</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><span style="font-family:Verdana;">·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Best practices framework for security program development.</span><br style="font-family:Verdana;" /><br style="font-family:Verdana;" />