---
id: 74
title: '415 HUMAN FACTORS IN COMPUTER AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS- COM 415 NOTES PART 3'
date: 2015-11-06T19:52:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/11/06/11985090/
permalink: /2015/11/06/11985090/
swp_pinterest_image_url:
  - ""
swp_cache_timestamp:
  - "419230"
post_views_count:
  - "102"
bs_social_share_facebook:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_twitter:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_reddit:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_google_plus:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_linkedin:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_interval:
  - "1568143695"
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1 The impact that the development of HCI has had on society</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">With the development of new HCI&#8217;s, computers have become more accessible to people and so are being used more and more in everyday life. A large amount of the population own computers or have access to a computer to use for whatever purpose they need it for, whether that to word process documents, research material online, send emails. Computer chips are also used in a large range of electrical equipment for example domestic and industrial appliances from washing machines to microwaves to cook food where buttons and dials can be used as the interface. Many businesses, hospitals, researchers, creative industries (for example Movie, Games and TV companies) are just some of the people that depend upon computers.&nbsp;</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">By creating new ways for people to interact with computer easily and effectively, means that computers can be accessed by a larger range of people and could even be used in new ways. But also creating a new form of HCI, even if designed to be easier and more effective for human use, sometimes isn&#8217;t picked up on quickly or sometimes avoided because it is designed to be used in a manner that some people find unusual or alien to them. That&#8217;s why a lot of developers try to keep consistency in their HCI designs, so that people who have used one of their programs and then can open another one of their programs and feel more comfortable, as the menus, options, colours, fonts and the overall interface look similar to their other program.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Even domestic appliances make use of simple and well-designed HCI&#8217;s, as people normally understand how to use the appliance without even looking at the instruction manual before use. Not only do the domestic appliances use words to explain to the user what each button does but they can also use images, drawing or icons &nbsp;to inform the user about the function of each button. Using images can be more effective than using words, as images can be universally recognized, whereas words can only be understood by people who speak that language (for example the pause and play icons that have transferred from musical cassette players to computer software). Not only has the computer changed because of the developments in HCI, but almost everything that has a computer within it, from washing machines to microwaves to mobile phones.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Tailored interfaces have also been developed, in order to aid or enable users&#8217; with sight or speech impairments to use computers. Voice recognition software allows the user to speak, via a microphone to the computer in order to write text. The software takes what the user has said and then converts it into text on the screen, as if it’s being typed by the user. Although this software can aid those with visual impairments &nbsp;there can be some draw backs for the user, such as a delay between what has been said and the word being displayed on the screen or requiring the user &#8216;train&#8217; the computer to accept their voice. Speech synthesis, similar to voice recognition, creates speech from word that the user has entered. An example of this would be the software that Stephen Hawking uses to interact with other people. The same method and artificial intelligence is also used within automated phone services, but instead of entering text the user is asked to press a different key in their phone.&nbsp;</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">There are also interfaces that are designed that don&#8217;t use voice recognition or speech synthesis, but make use of extra on screen help. For example, subtitles can be turned on for TV programs movies and even some web sites, to help users that have hearing impairments. Some interfaces have be specially design for users with sight impairments &nbsp;by making use of larger text or using colour that are not affected by people who are colour blind. Red-green combination is the most common form of colour blindness, so by using a red-blue or yellow-blue colour combination in the interface design would allow a lot of people who are colour blind not to miss information and find using the interface easier.&nbsp;</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Remote controlled devices are often used for hostile environments that are too dangerous for humans, such as using bomb disposal robots to locate and dispose of explosives. Other forms of HCI can be used to allow for people to access inaccessible environments, like sending satellites into space or remote controlled vehicle to Mars to conduct research. This means that the user can be a safe, in some cases a long distance away from the danger.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Although there are relatively simple GUI&#8217;s that are used every single day in businesses and at home, there are also some very complex HCI&#8217;s. The fly-by-wire system can be fitted to aircraft in order to replace human actions, sent from the aircraft&#8217;s computer, like stabilizing the aircraft without the pilot&#8217;s input. Some of the latest complex HCI&#8217;s track the users&#8217; physical movements, allowing the user to interact with the device using hand or other body movements. An example of this would be Microsoft&#8217;s Xbox 360 Kinect, which allows the player (or players) to play games using the movement of their hands. This give players a more immersive gameplay, as it can simulate some games (like tennis, gold or other sports) better than the traditional controller can.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1.1 Improved usability/friendliness</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">People will go with whatever they find easiest/most convenient to use, while some will stay with what they already have. What usability and user friendliness comes down to is user experience.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1.2 Touch screens</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Touch screens have revolutionized the way a generation operates computers, especially with new mobile phones and portable computers such as the iphone and ipad. Which uses a touch screen interface, and has since set the new standard for portable technology. Touch screens also help to create a simpler input as the user would only need to touch the icon to start a program rather than having to press multiple buttons to navigate the options.&nbsp;</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1.3 Games controllers</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">The multiple peripherals for game control have been around for a while but have only recently began to kick off as a major form of interaction, with motion control the user must physically move around to access the features. This is reduction of specialist knowledge, as the need for understanding the controls has been eliminated because anyone can pickup and use a motion controller due to it not having many buttons and only needing to be within a certain radius of the console.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1.4 Mobile phones</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Mobile phones had a massive effect on society when they first came around, they were a major breakthrough in portable communications technology. People were able to freely communicate via telecoms in public without a phone box, although early mobile tech was only seriously adopted by business execs needing to make important phone calls, and early mobiles were the size of a brick. Mobile technology has developed to the point now that the phones now fit into our pockets and almost everyone has one. This is user friendliness as a mobile phones main purpose is to phone calls on the go so they would ned to make the interface as easy to use as possible.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1.5 Heads up display</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Heads up displays were originally designed for military aircraft but are now available for use in regular civilian flights. They allow pilots to transfer from different planes without any additional training. Heads up displays can now be seen in cars and even as apps for the iPhone. HUD&#8217;s have made a strong impact on aircraft, for instance, a pilot would greatly benefit from having a HUD as it allows all the information he needs on-screen so he would only need to be looking forward allowing him to concentrate on flying, whereas if the data needed was off-screen to the side it means he would have to divert his attention, causing a big risk factor as his attention is not focused on piloting the plane.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1.6 Domestic appliance displays</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">It is now possible for household accessories and amenities such as the fridge or ovens to possess a heads up display, or glass touch mirror. This essentially only serves to make the appliance more fashionable and easier to use.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1.7 Specialized interfaces</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">as computers have become more widely available and used by a wider variety of people, it is sensible to assume that some of these users will have slight visual impairments so appropriate features such as altering size of text, or changing the colour of the text or background to make it easier to see or users who are colour blind.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1.8 Interfaces for hostile environments</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">There are interfaces which have been created for the purpose of allowing man to explore dangerous environments in complete safety, one such creation is an aerial drone which is remote controlled. It is used for environments such as warzones as it allows the &#8216;pilot&#8217; to monitor enemy territory without fear of being harmed. Another example of this would be scientists using a remote controlled robot to collect mineral samples from a volcano, which is also data logging.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1.8.1 The impact HCI has had on economy</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">The development of HCI has made a negative impact on the economy as it will increase the amount of automated machines which would mean there would be less need for employees, potentially this could cause mass job loss, and those who are out of work will not be spending as much resulting in a weaker economy. However, this could also be a positive impact as the employees could be kept to maintain the machines which will then increase productivity allowing manufacturing companies to produce much more of a product in one day than before the automation, although a downside to this is if one of the machines breaks down the whole production line is halted or if a fault is detected in one of its products the whole batch may also have this defect so it was all a waste remaining a loss for the company.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">But the development of HCI has also had a positive effect on the economy because sending mass mail via e-mail will save time and resources when compared to making multiple copies of letters. Business execs can save travel costs and flight time by using video conferencing instead of travelling abroad. A company with lots of computers connected to its network can mean that there would be more gateways for them to be hacked into so they would need an adequate level of security otherwise they would be at risk and a potential outside intrusion would be a major loss for the company.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Millions are wasted each year in transporting outdated technology, e-waste, to developing countries to be disposed of, some technology cannot be destroyed so it is stored in warehouses, the same millions used to transport the waste could be saved if it was recycled. People must also be aware that they should destroy their hard drives to wipe out all personally identifiable information before they dispose of the system, if not it could be retrieved using special recovery software and all the previous owners details such as e-mails, passwords bank/credit card information could be discovered meaning they could be future victims of fraud.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1.8.2 The impact that the development of HCI has had on culture</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">HCI has the potential to drastically change the way a generation learns, as making interfaces automated and easier to use will effectively deskill their workload and as this deskilling progresses they will become accustomed to having computers do their work for them. If this continues then people will gradually have lesser intelligence because all they will know what to do is click buttons that run the procedures automatically, and this will have a sociological impact as people will have weak literacy and social skills, consistently using slang and abbreviations, being unable to write by hand and with every new generation comes new technology and the cycle will repeat meaning every generation will become less intelligent than the previous.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">But HCI can have a positive impact on culture because people will be able to make contact with others from around the globe, this will give everyone a chance to learn about other cultures and traditions. Being able to understand one another will prevent causing offence and will open up new relations to other countries.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">One such topic that can relate to both culture and economy is the introduction of mobile phone networks to Africa. Doing so as enabled the small tribes scattered throughout the continent to communicate with the outside world through the network interfaces like social networking sites, unlike before where they had to send a person to run between villages, it has also allowed them access to websites such as eBay which has allowed them to buy and sell items such as tools/equipment and various other items, this has allowed wealth and smaller scale economies to be created.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.1.8.3 The impact of future development of HCI﻿</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">The idea of HCI is the interaction between human and computer, the earliest form of this is the CLE (Command Line Editor, although it can also be called command line interface), the whole computer system can be controlled by using the CLE, any task can be performed but the downside to this is that the user would need to know the exact command and type it in with 100% accuracy otherwise it will not be recognized. The CLE is good at performing precise actions, but requires in-depth knowledge meaning that only a smaller group of knowledgeable users can use it effectively, it also takes a long time to correctly type in the commands and complete a task.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">When CLE was the only form of HCI very few people had a computer as you needed the knowledge to use it which once again very few people had, but then came along a new form of HCI called a GUI (Graphical User Interface). The introduction of the GUI drastically changed the way computers were used, they were no longer only operable by the experts as the GUI had created a kind of &#8216;point and click&#8217; system where the user need only click on an icon and the program/process would activate. Thanks to the GUI, almost everyone now has a computer and the CLE is now usually just used by network administrators to run maintenance tasks and perform data transfers.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">A visual system is simply the features and icons on the desktop and the menus, it is effectively a &#8216;what you see is what you get&#8217; system where the user can only access the programs that they can see icons for, this may limit a user’s experience with a GUI system by not being able to access all the files they want but creating new buttons/icons is not a problem.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.2 The technical aspects of interaction between humans and computers</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.2.1 Human Computer Interaction Work on Information Retrieval</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Whereas most of the theory and applications in HCI of the 1980s and early 1990s focused on computationally supported office applications such as word processors and spreadsheets, one of the major theoretical advances of the late 1990s came in an examination of information-retrieval behavior. Spurred by the advent of the World Wide Web and ubiquitous “surfing” behavior, Pirolli & Card (1999) investigated how people decide to continue in a line of searches and when to jump to a different source or search string. To model this behavior they drew on foraging theory from biology. They saw the analogy between the movement of animals from one food source to another (a “patch”) and people’s movement from one information source to another. They modeled the moment-by-moment decisions people make in their assessment of the value of what they see in search results to predict when they would pop back up to a high level change in a search string or a completely different source such as stopping searching the web and asking a reference librarian.&nbsp;</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">This work also highlighted the importance of the display of the search results in the way it gives clues (“scents”) as to whether further selection of an item is likely to be valuable (“to bear fruit”). So, for example, if a Google search returns only headers or urls, it has a less informative “scent” than a display of the sentence fragments that surround the words that match the search string. These bits of information give the user clues as to whether the selection of that item is likely to be useful.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">The Card and Pirolli information-foraging work is remarkable not only in its novelty of task and approach, but in the variety of methods they bring to play in their work. They motivate the investigation with some descriptions of real people searching for information—a team of MBAs doing an industry analysis and a consultant writing his monthly report on a topic. From phenomena gleaned from these cases, they worked with mathematical foraging theory, applying various concepts and equations to information rather than food-seeking behavior.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Of particular relevance here were calculations on the time a person would spend in a fruitful region of information before moving on to another and the factors that drove the decision to move. They then moved to modeling the moment-by moment behavior of people conducting their search with an ACT-IF model (the ACT-R model applied to information foraging, IF). The mathematical analyses show aggregate behavioral trends (e.g., average time to linger as a function of richness of the scent), whereas the ACT-IF model allowed them to explore various mechanisms that might account for this behavior. They concluded with an empirical laboratory study of people making such switching decisions in a particular information-retrieval system called the “Scatter/Gather” interface. They made very specific predictions of when someone would stop searching a source (when the average value of a found item dropped below an estimated middle point). They also encouraged designs to give “scent,” hints as to the ultimate value of continuing searching on a particular path, such as meaningful labels and revealing search results.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.3 User Interface Developments</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">As computing technology changes, new user interface challenges arise. For instance, in the early days of personal computing screen displays were mostly command lines in green or yellow on a black background. Editing a manuscript included placing explicit formatting characters in the text. With the emergence of graphical user interfaces (GUIs), whole new classes of issues emerged, as well as new opportunities for tapping into key cognitive and perceptual processes. Much of the design of early GUIs was influenced by psychological research (e.g., Johnson et al. 1989). Such systems have been around long enough that they have achieved some level of stability in design, even across different hardware and software platforms.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Now all kinds of new situations are emerging that are challenges to human-computer interaction specialists. We briefly describe some examples of these and indicate the character of some of the psychological issues involved. As applications move from the desktop to more mobile, immersive environments and to a wider set of users, there remain a number of challenges for basic psychology. How do people understand aspects of the digital world as it is embodied in these various devices? How do we capitalize on the strengths of each human, coupling them with assistance from computing, to bring about the most in a productive, satisfying life?</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.3.1 Mobile Devices</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">In the past decade a wide variety of small mobile devices have appeared. The most common are what are called personal digital assistants or PDAs. These are small handheld devices that have increasingly sophisticated computational capabilities. The user interface challenges are daunting. These devices typically have small screens, and interactions are with a stylus and a small set of buttons. Some models have optional folding keyboards that allow for more traditional interactions. Despite these user interface challenges, such devices have a number of very useful functions and are very popular. Combinations of mobile devices, such as the merging of PDAs and cell phones, are just appearing.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">One specialized user interface issue is how-to integrate such mobile devices with more traditional computing. For instance, Milewski & Smith (2000) developed a digital address book with location sensors that could be accessed from a regular workstation or from a PDA and that provided information about the availability of others that could be used to coordinate phone calls regardless of where the participants might be. The interface had to be adapted to the capabilities of each device in a way that users found intuitive and natural.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.3.2 Immersive Environments</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Virtual reality environments are artificial 3-D environments created computationally to either mimic a real environment or to create a novel one. These can vary in their immersiveness. The least immersive would be a 3-D environment presented on a computer screen. This could be enhanced by stereo glasses that give a real 3-D experience. Alternatively, the user can wear a head-mounted display for a completely immersive experience. Special rooms such as the CAVE (Cruz-Neira et al. 1992) can surround the user with an immersive experience, with all the surfaces of the room having projected information and with stereo glasses used to create apparent objects that hover in space. Virtual reality environments have been used for a variety of serious as well as playful purposes (see extensive examples in Barfield & Furness 1997).</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Collaborative virtual environments are those in which multiple persons interact, either in games or in collaborative activities like data exploration. Because of limitations in computational power, people are usually represented as avatars, simplified, geometric, digital representations of people, who move about in the 3-D space (Singhal 1999). The users in a meeting situation might interact over a digitally represented object, such as a mock-up of a real object (an automobile engine, an airplane hinge, a piece of industrial equipment) or with visualizations of abstract data (e.g., a 3-D visualization of atmospheric data). It has proven difficult to establish mutual awareness or orientation in such spaces, because the small windows do not provide a good sense of where you are (Hindmarsh et al. 1998, Park et al. 2000). There have even been some attempts to merge collaborative virtual environments with real ones, though with limited success so far (Benford et al. 1998).</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">These virtual environments engage numerous perceptual, cognitive, and social issues. The interface devices for such environments, such as head-mounted displays, wands that allow manipulation and selection of virtual objects, and special data gloves that allow life-like manipulation of virtual objects, all have required extensive human-factors development (Barfield & Furness 1997). A special challenge is integrating such virtual environments with human capabilities to yield enhanced performance and experiences.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.3.3 Ubiquitous Computing</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Weiser (1991) stated, “The most profound technologies are those that disappear. They weave themselves into the fabric of everyday life until they are indistinguishable from it.” Through this analysis he forecast what he claimed would be the third wave of computing (after mainframes and personal computers), ubiquitous computing, or as he often called it, ubicomp. This would be when computers would be so small, inexpensive, and ubiquitous that they would disappear. Small computational devices can perform a variety of functions. For example, so-called smart houses have computational devices that can control a variety of functions such as heat, lighting, kitchen appliances, intercoms, entertainment, and telephones. The proliferation of computing devices raises many user interface issues about how to control all of these devices and how to give users adequate flexibility, security, and privacy.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.3.4 Internet, Worldwide Web (WWW)</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Although the ubiquity of the Internet and the wealth of information available through it is stunning, the user interface took a giant step backwards from the set of applications people were using before its arrival. There is very little interaction with web sites other than finding and clicking on action buttons that promise continuing good information. Most of the user issues have to do with navigation (how did I get to this site and how do I return to it?), readability of the material presented (font size and color, as well as Gestalt principles of organization), and impatience with long system response times. In order to make sense out of mountains of information in a web site (like the gateway to the University’s store of information), designers are borrowing principles from library science, creating a field called information architecture. In information architecture the focus is on the organization, navigation, labeling, and search systems that offer accessibility to the end user (Rosenfeld & Morville 1998). With information architecture coupled with good user interface design principles, there is hope that the users will be better able to realize what information resides in a large web site and then be able to navigate through it to find what they want.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">In addition to the design and organization issues are issues of motivation and trust. There are design prescriptions gleaned from empirical studies of web-searching behavior that claim that if in three clicks users do not find information that at least suggests they are on the right track, they will leave the site (Kuegler, 2000). This bold prescription harkens to the Card and Pirolli information-foraging theory, making explicit the effort people will expend in an information patch before moving on to another source. Also, when encountering a site for purchasing goods (e.g., Amazon.com) or for getting professional advice (e.g., webMD.com), people need to assess the trustworthiness of the service. Some people are reluctant to enter their credit card information or reveal their illness concerns, whereas others are unconcerned with the potential loss of privacy or even identity theft in these un-vetted sites [the Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery (CACM) offered a special issue on trust in December 2000]. What is it that makes people trust? How do risk and loss get assessed in the technical world? Do people use the same criteria to assess trust in cyberspace that they do in the physical world?</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">1.3.5 Extended Populations of Users</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Early work on human-computer interaction (HCI) focused little on individual differences. Results were targeted to the educated office worker without disabilities or particular talents. Today there is a healthy interest in interfaces for children and for people with disabilities, including the aging population. Children, for example, have less-well-organized knowledge from which to build metaphorical interfaces, have less-well-developed motor skills, and are interested in new, unsubtle changes in their environment. Design prescriptions follow the recognition of these different capabilities, creating larger and more colorful input devices, heavy use of animation, and explanatory material using speech instead of text (Druin & Soloman, 1996).</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">2 Human factors, issues in the development of software, the use of database systems, and the design of interactive computer systems&nbsp;</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Incorporating a human computer interaction (HCI) perspective into the systems development life cycle (SDLC) is critical to information systems (IS) success and in turn to the success of businesses. However, modern SDLC models are based more on organizational needs than human needs. The human interaction aspect of an information system is considered far too little (only the screen interface) and far too late in the IS development process (only at the design stage).</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">2.0.1 Critical Cognitive Engineering Challenges in APL’s Environment</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">The lure of technology has been that it will make our lives easier. The reality is that technology has made our lives more stressful than ever. Our bosses have continuous access to us (Blackberries, cell phones, and DSL), our customers have fewer resources and are therefore demanding the highest performance at the lowest cost, our adversaries are striving for the competitive edge and have instantaneous access to the same information as we do, our families just want our time, and the information technology industry continues to give us ever more gadgets to help us balance these often competing demands. People are left to navigate through the morass of technology to cobble a “system” together that they can use to meet their performance requirements.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Information technology affords tremendous capacity for data transfer by increasing the availability of data, enabling interoperability between systems, and massively increasing bandwidth and processing. One result is people (warfighters, students, health-care professionals, educators, bankers, etc.) drowning in data and information while frequently lacking real knowledge.&nbsp;</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Goal-based performance requires that information be transmitted seamlessly as knowledge to the decision maker. To achieve this, the human must be actively involved in information transformation by synthesizing his/her experience with available information to generate useful knowledge. We can no longer rely on information systems to push this information; it must be ubiquitously available on demand (available for pull). Total system performance includes the human element, which is now the limiting factor. It is incumbent upon system developers to be more understanding of this environment and of the human role within the overall system.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">2.1 Human Factors in Software and Systems Development</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Human Computer Interaction (HCI) is a multidisciplinary subject where HCI experts play an important role in designing a usable system. HCI experts are knowledgeable in understanding of human nature, requirement modeling and user interface design. User Interface Design (UID) is one of the important aspects of HCI, which focuses on ease of use, ease of learning, user performance and user satisfaction. On the other hand Software Engineering (SE) focuses on requirement especially functional requirement that must be translated into the running system.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Generally, there is a lack of clarity about HCI and its role in the systems development life cycle (SDLC). One misperception of HCI is that it only is about the final user interface design, such as form design, menu layout, and choice of colors, icon design, and screen layout of display interfaces. Many popular Systems Analysis and Design (SA&D) textbooks contain only one or two chapters in the design stage of SDLC to cover these user interface issues. Undeniably, these are HCI considerations in Information Systems development, but they are far from being exclusive or being the most important ones. Very often, users of an IS are most frustrated or annoyed by problems that are beyond the computer screen level. Illogical overall organization of data/information in the system, lack of task support, misfit between the nature of the task and the support provided, difficulty of navigation, and inconsistent mental models of system operation are among the major problems or difficulties users’ experience. These incompatibilities may affect user reaction, acceptance, and use of the information system.&nbsp;</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">These problems may be rooted in the neglect of complex human cognitive, affective, and behavioral factors and the dynamics of human interactions with technologies. These issues affect users’ interaction with the information system and may be addressed during HCI development practices. A better understanding of various human cognitive, affective, and behavioral factors involved in users’ tasks, problem solving processes and interaction contexts is required to address these problems. Just as it is important to understand systems requirements as early as possible, it is critical that human technology interaction should be addressed at the beginning of SDLC. Another erroneous perception is that HCI is only about usability. ISO defines usability as “the extent to which a product can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in a specified context of use (Bevan, 2001).” Usability is considered as part of system acceptability (Nielsen, 1993). In the software engineering community, usability is more narrowly associated with user interface design and is defined as “a set of attributes that bear on the effort needed for use, and on the individual assessment of such use, by a stated or implied set of users (Bevan, 2001).”</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Although usability has been a dominant part of the HCI field, abundant empirical studies on user technology acceptance prove that usability is neither the only nor the most important predictor of system acceptance and usage (Venkatesh et al., 2003, Davis, 1989). Recent research and practice in IS, HCI and other related fields go beyond usability and explore other factors affecting the human interactions with technologies. Users affective reactions and their holistic experiences with technology are gaining more attention and becoming more important (Agarwal and Karahanna, 2000, Zhang et al., 2002). This shift from a user-centered to a human-centered perspective requires more understanding about humans and their interactions with tasks and technologies.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Lack of user involvement in software development not only affects product quality but also resulted in user dissatisfaction. Studies show that, many users are not satisfied due to the problem in the software interface and unhelpful error messages that affect product quality. This is because users were not properly involved in the entire software development process. User involvement takes place at the early stage when collecting the requirement and at the later stage of the development in order to validate and verify their requirements.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">In most Software development projects, user involvement is only in the phase of collecting functional requirements. Only few users’ involvement seems at collecting requirement or at the development phase of software. From the developers perspective, users’ involvement is still negligible during the design and development stage” because of the perception that the users’ lack technical knowledge in software development.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">2.2 Human factors in the use and design of database systems</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">The widespread dissemination of computer and information systems to non-technically trained individuals requires a new approach to the design and development of database interfaces. As questions of technical feasibility and performance of database systems are resolved, there is need to pay attention to human factors. There is widespread recognition that modern computer systems will be commercially viable only if the user interface is in harmony with user skills and task requirements. Whilst Management increasingly are focusing on human factors, technical professionals have shown little predilection to go beyond introspection and their own experience. Unfortunately, the background of a systems or language designer may be profoundly different from the background of the intended users. Even if this were not the case, casual introspection hardly seems an adequate basis to develop costly and widely used computer and information systems.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">One of the reasons why database user interface design has not been adequately addressed, in HCI research is that database systems have quite specific characteristics. On one level this may have fostered the mistaken notion that database systems and applications were uninteresting. Quite apart from the economic importance of database systems, these same distinctive characteristics should render databases of particular interest to HCI researchers. For example: users often need to interact with very large volumes of data; database systems are fundamentally cooperative in that data is shared by multiple users; and there is a quite distinct division of roles for users of database systems.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">A particular challenge is provided by uncertainty about the applicability of principles of HCI derived from other domains. For example, one of the key features of direct manipulation systems as defined by Shneiderman (1982) is that all the items of data of interest to the user are continuously displayed for the duration of the user&#8217;s interest. As observed by Draper (1992), the sheer volume of data which a database user may need to manipulate poses particular difficulties for meeting this requirement. This implies that databases may challenge some of the accepted tenets of HCI.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">2.2.1 Database Functions</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Functions are the operations that users wish to perform on the database. An item may be a field, a record, a collection of records, a file, or the entire database. Primary transaction-oriented functions include:</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">i. Insertion of one or more items. This operation typically includes the specification of the keys and related data.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">ii. Deletion of one or more items. This operation typically requires the user to specify a key which is then located in the database. If the record is found, it is deleted and may trigger other changes to the database.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">iii. Retrieval of information from the database. The user provides a query and the database system returns required information, possibly storing it for later use. A retrieval may be as complex as the copying of the entire database.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">Ancillary functions include:</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">iv. Locking and unlocking of items to provide for integrity during concurrent processing.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">v. Privacy check to ensure that the user is permitted to perform the function requested.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">vi. Data definition to create a schema or subschema. This includes description of items and relationships in the database.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">vii. Utility functions include database administration operations such as an initial load, physical reorganization, logical restructuring, data translation, performance statistics collection, and data validation.</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">&nbsp;</span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;"><br /></span>
</h2>

<h2 style="margin-bottom:0pt;margin-top:0pt;">
  <span style="line-height:27.3600006103516px;font-size:small;">2.2.2 Tasks</span>
</h2>