---
id: 248
title: Some Definitions in statistics
date: 2015-04-28T13:52:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/04/28/10129533/
permalink: /2015/04/28/10129533/
swp_pinterest_image_url:
  - ""
swp_cache_timestamp:
  - "425444"
Likes:
  - "1"
Dislikes:
  - "0"
Likes minus dislikes:
  - "1"
post_views_count:
  - "92"
bs_social_share_facebook:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_twitter:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_reddit:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_google_plus:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_linkedin:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_interval:
  - "1567973146"
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
<span style="font-family:Verdana;">Variable &#8211; any characteristic of an individual or entity. A variable can take different values for different individuals. Variables can be categorical or quantitative. Per S. S. Stevens…</p> 

<p>
  &nbsp;Nominal &#8211; Categorical variables with no inherent order or ranking&nbsp;&nbsp; sequence such as names or classes (e.g., gender). Value may be a numerical, but without numerical value (e.g., I, II, III). The only operation that can be applied to Nominal variables is enumeration.<br />&nbsp;Ordinal &#8211; Variables with an inherent rank or order, e.g. mild, moderate, severe. Can be compared for equality, or greater or less, but not how much greater or less.<br />&nbsp;Interval &#8211; Values of the variable are ordered as in Ordinal, and additionally, differences between values are meaningful, however, the scale is not absolutely anchored. Calendar dates and temperatures on the Fahrenheit scale are examples. Addition and subtraction, but not multiplication and division are meaningful operations.<br />&nbsp;Ratio &#8211; Variables with all properties of Interval plus an absolute, non-arbitrary zero point, e.g. age, weight, temperature (Kelvin). Addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division are all meaningful operations.<br />Distribution &#8211; (of a variable) tells us what values the variable takes and how often it takes these values.<br />Unimodal &#8211; having a single peak<br />Bimodal &#8211; having two distinct peaks<br />Symmetric &#8211; left and right half are mirror images.
</p>

<p>
  </span>
</p>