---
id: 341
title: 'INFORMATION  SYSTEMS SECURITY  Lecture 2 part 1– Threat/Vulnerability Assessments and Risk Analysis'
date: 2015-03-25T07:45:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/03/25/9698889/
permalink: /2015/03/25/9698889/
swp_pinterest_image_url:
  - ""
swp_cache_timestamp:
  - "419230"
post_views_count:
  - "163"
bs_social_share_facebook:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_twitter:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_reddit:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_google_plus:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_linkedin:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_interval:
  - "1572394329"
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
Threat/Vulnerability Assessments and Risk Analysis  
All facilities face a certain level of risk associated with various threats. These threats may be the result of natural events, accidents, or intentional acts to cause harm. Regardless of the nature of the threat, facility owners have a responsibility to limit or manage risks from these threats to the extent possible. The federal government has implemented the Interagency Security Committee (ISC) Security Design Criteria.  
Threat Assessment  
The first step in a risk management program is a threat assessment. A threat assessment considers the full spectrum of threats (i.e., natural, criminal, terrorist, accidental, etc.) for a given facility/location.  
&nbsp;The assessment should examine supporting information to evaluate the likelihood of occurrence for each threat. For natural threats, historical data concerning frequency of occurrence for given natural disasters such as tornadoes, hurricanes, floods, fire, or earthquakes can be used to determine the credibility of the given threat.  
The type of assets and/or activity located in the facility will also relate directly to the likelihood of various types of accidents. For example, a facility that utilizes heavy industrial machinery will be at higher risk for serious or life-threatening job related accidents than a typical office building.  
Vulnerability Assessment  
Once the credible threats are identified, a vulnerability assessment must be performed. The vulnerability assessment considers the potential impact of loss from a successful attack as well as the vulnerability of the facility/location to an attack. Impact of loss is the degree to which the mission of the agency is impaired by a successful attack from the given threat. A key component of the vulnerability assessment is properly defining the ratings for impact of loss and vulnerability. These definitions may vary greatly from facility to facility. For example, the amount of time that mission capability is impaired is an important part of impact of loss. If the facility being assessed is an Air Route Traffic Control Tower, a downtime of a few minutes may be a serious impact of loss, while for a Social Security office a downtime of a few minutes would be minor. A sample set of definitions for impact of loss is provided below. These definitions are for an organization that generates revenue by serving the public.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Devastating: The facility is damaged/contaminated beyond habitable use. Most items/assets are lost, destroyed, or damaged beyond repair/restoration. The number of visitors to other facilities in the organization may be reduced by up to 75% for a limited period of time.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Severe: The facility is partially damaged/contaminated. Examples include partial structure breach resulting in weather/water, smoke, impact, or fire damage to some areas. Some items/assets in the facility are damaged beyond repair, but the facility remains mostly intact. The entire facility may be closed for a period of up to two weeks and a portion of the facility may be closed for an extended period of time (more than one month). Some assets may need to be moved to remote locations to protect them from environmental damage. The number of visitors to the facility and others in the organization may be reduced by up to 50% for a limited period of time.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Noticeable: The facility is temporarily closed or unable to operate, but can continue without an interruption of more than one day. A limited number of assets may be damaged, but the majority of the facility is not affected. The number of visitors to the facility and others in the organization may be reduced by up to 25% for a limited period of time.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Minor: The facility experiences no significant impact on operations (downtime is less than four hours) and there is no loss of major assets.  
Vulnerability is defined to be a combination of the attractiveness of a facility as a target and the level of deterrence and/or defense provided by the existing countermeasures. Target attractiveness is a measure of the asset or facility in the eyes of an aggressor and is influenced by the function and/or symbolic importance of the facility. Sample definitions for vulnerability ratings are as follows:  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Very High: This is a high profile facility that provides a very attractive target for potential adversaries, and the level of deterrence and/or defense provided by the existing countermeasures is inadequate.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;High: This is a high profile regional facility or a moderate profile national facility that provides an attractive target and/or the level of deterrence and/or defense provided by the existing countermeasures is inadequate.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Moderate: This is a moderate profile facility (not well known outside the local area or region) that provides a potential target and/or the level of deterrence and/or defense provided by the existing countermeasures is marginally adequate.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Low: This is not a high profile facility and provides a possible target and/or the level of deterrence and/or defense provided by the existing countermeasures is adequate.

MANAGEMENT  
Risk is a combination of the severity and frequency (probability) of the hazardous event.  
Risk Analysis is a process of evaluating the probability of hazardous events  
Risk: is a quantified measure of the likelihood of a threat being realised.  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;The strength of an information infrastructure depends on how well information resources are managed&#8211;what, how, where, and for whom sources of information are established and made available for reuse  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;To say Risk Analysis is an important issue is an understatement. It is difficult to quantify the losses suffered each year by businesses arising from the use and misuse of Information Systems (IS)  
IS risk analysis is the process of:  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;identifying potential causes of loss;  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;designing and implementing controls to prevent them, and, should these fail;  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Designing and implementing controls to detect any occurrences and to minimize their effect.  
Risk Analysis involves the identification and assessment of the levels of risk, calculated from the  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Values of assets  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Threats to the assets  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Their vulnerabilities and likelihood of exploitation  
Risk Management involves the identification, selection and adoption of security measures justified by  
◦&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;The identified risks to assets  
◦&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;The reduction of these risks to acceptable levels  
Some associated terms used in this area include:-  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Threat: Harm that can happen to an asset  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Impact: A measure of the seriousness of a threat  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Attack: A threatening event  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Attacker: The agent causing an attack (not necessarily human)  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Vulnerability: a weakness in the system that makes an attack more likely to succeed  
Risk Analysis and Management

An agreed upon framework is:-

To asses risk:-  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;use a risk matrix to evaluate threat & counter-measure

·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;use a risk management model to manage threat  
Responses to Risk  
You respond to a risk by either:-  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Avoid it completely by withdrawing from an activity  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Accept it and do nothing  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Reduce it with security measures  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Transfer – Involves a third-party liability taking/ insurance.

DESIGNING RISK ANALYSIS  
When designing a risk analysis for information systems, the following components can be considered:  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;People&#8211;the information users and producers who direct, prioritize, interpret, and apply data and information to policy problems  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Documents, databases, and other information entities that hold information and data collections  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Information processes such as collection, storage, retrieval, dissemination, communication, and display  
·&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Information technologies&#8211;the know-how for manipulating and accessing information, including the conceptual, statistical, and model-building structures that aggregate and process data and produce information content, as well as mechanisms, people, and/or systems that provide intellectual, physical, and economical access to information