---
id: 288
title: 'LECTURE 7 &#8211; CRYPTOGRAPHY'
date: 2015-04-16T14:23:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/04/16/9974192/
permalink: /2015/04/16/9974192/
swp_pinterest_image_url:
  - ""
swp_cache_timestamp:
  - "419230"
post_views_count:
  - "274"
bs_social_share_facebook:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_twitter:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_reddit:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_google_plus:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_linkedin:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_interval:
  - "1568033231"
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
<font face="Verdana">Cryptography is the practice and study of techniques for secure communication in the presence of third parties.<br />It is about constructing and analyzing protocols that overcome the influence of adversaries and which are related to various aspects in information security such as data confidentiality, data integrity, authentication, and non-repudiation.<br />Encryption is the process of encoding messages (or information) in such a way that unauthorized parties cannot access.<br />In an encryption scheme, the message (plaintext) is encrypted using an encryption algorithm, turning it into an unreadable (ciphertext). This is usually done with the use of an encryption key, which specifies how the message is to be encoded.<br />An authorized party, however, is able to decode the ciphertext using a decryption algorithm, that usually requires a secret decryption key.<br />An encryption scheme usually needs a key-generation algorithm to randomly produce keys.<br />There are two basic types of encryption schemes:<br />Symmetric-key and<br />Public-key encryption.</font>

<font face="Verdana">Symmetric-key<br />In symmetric-key schemes, the encryption and decryption keys are the same. Thus communicating parties must agree on a secret key before they wish to communicate.<br />Symmetric-key encryption can use either stream ciphers or block ciphers.<br />Stream ciphers encrypt the digits one at a time.<br />Block ciphers take a number of bits and encrypt them as a single unit, padding the plaintext so that it is a multiple of the block size. Blocks of 64 bits have been commonly used. The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) algorithm approved by NIST in December 2001 uses 128-bit blocks.<br />In public-key schemes, the encryption key is published for anyone to use and encrypt messages. However, only the receiving party has access to the decryption key and is capable of reading the encrypted messages.<br />There are two main uses for public-key cryptography:<br />Public-key encryption, in which a message is encrypted with a recipient&#8217;s public key. The message cannot be decrypted by anyone who does not possess the matching private key. This is used in an attempt to ensure confidentiality.<br />Digital signatures, in which a message is signed with the sender&#8217;s private key and can be verified by anyone who has access to the sender&#8217;s public key. This verification proves that the sender had access to the private key, and therefore is likely to be the person associated with the public key. This also ensures that the message has not been tampered, as any manipulation of the message will result in changes to the encoded message digest, which otherwise remains unchanged between the sender and receiver.<br />Cryptographic hash function<br />A hash function that takes an arbitrary block of data and returns a fixed-size bit string. The data to be encoded are often called the message, and the hash value is sometimes called the message digest or simply digest.<br />The ideal cryptographic hash function has four main properties:<br />it is easy to compute the hash value for any given message<br />it is impossible to generate a message that has a given hash<br />it is impossible to modify a message without changing the hash<br />it is impossible to find two different messages with the same hash.<br />Cryptographic hash functions have many information security applications, notably in digital signatures, message authentication codes (MACs), and other forms of authentication. They can also be used as ordinary hash functions, to index data in hash tables, for fingerprinting, to detect duplicate data or uniquely identify files, and as checksums to detect accidental data corruption. Indeed, in information security contexts, cryptographic hash values are sometimes called (digital) fingerprints, checksums, or just hash values, even though all these terms stand for more general functions with rather different properties and purposes.<br />Encryption<br />Alice transmits her public key (n, e) to Bob and keeps the private key secret. Bob then wishes to send message M to Alice.</font>

<font face="Verdana">He first turns M into an integer m, such that 0 ≤ m < n by using an agreed-upon reversible protocol known as a padding scheme. He then computes the ciphertext c corresponding to<br />This can be done quickly using the method of exponentiation by squaring. Bob then transmits c to Alice.<br />Decryption<br />Alice can recover m from c by using her private key exponent d via computing</font>

<font face="Verdana">Given m, she can recover the original message M by reversing the padding scheme.<br />RSA<br />is an algorithm for public-key cryptography that is based on the anticipated difficulty of factoring large integers, the factoring problem. RSA stands for Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir and Leonard Adleman, who first publicly described the algorithm in 1977.<br />A user of RSA creates and then publishes the product of two large prime numbers, along with an auxiliary value, as their public key. The prime factors must be kept secret, only someone with knowledge of the prime factors can decode the message. Whether breaking RSA encryption is as hard as factoring is an open question known as the RSA problem.<br />Attacks against plain RSA<br />There are a number of attacks against plain RSA as described below.<br />When encrypting with low encryption exponents (e.g., e = 3) and small values of the m, (i.e., m < n1/e) the result of me is strictly less than the modulus n. In this case, ciphertexts can be easily decrypted by taking the eth root of the ciphertext over the integers.<br />If the same clear text message is sent to e or more recipients in an encrypted way, and the receivers share the same exponent e, but different p, q, and therefore n, then it is easy to decrypt the original clear text message via the Chinese remainder theorem. Johan Håstad noticed that this attack is possible even if the cleartexts are not equal, but the attacker knows a linear relation between them. This attack was later improved by Don Coppersmith<br />Because RSA encryption is a deterministic encryption algorithm (i.e., has no random component) an attacker can launch a chosen plaintext attack against the cryptosystem, by encrypting likely plaintexts under the public key and test if they are equal to the ciphertext.<br />RSA has the property that the product of two ciphertexts is equal to the encryption of the product of the respective plaintexts. That is m1em2e ≡ (m1m2)e (mod n). Because of this multiplicative property a chosen-ciphertext attack is possible. E.g., an attacker, who wants to know the decryption of a ciphertext c ≡ me (mod n) may ask the holder of the private key to decrypt an unsuspicious-looking ciphertext c′ ≡ cre (mod n) for some value r chosen by the attacker. Because of the multiplicative property c′ is the encryption of mr (mod n). Hence, if the attacker is successful with the attack, he will learn mr (mod n) from which he can derive the message m by multiplying mr with the modular inverse of r modulo n.<br />Data Encryption Standard (DES)<br />The Data Encryption Standard (DES) is a previously predominant algorithm for the encryption of electronic data. It was highly influential in the advancement of modern cryptography in the academic world. The original DES cipher&#8217;s key size of 56 bits was generally sufficient when that algorithm was designed, but the availability of increasing computational power made brute-force attacks feasible.&nbsp;<br />Developed in the early 1970s at IBM and based on an earlier design by Horst Feistel, the algorithm was submitted to the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) following the agency&#8217;s invitation to propose a candidate for the protection of sensitive, unclassified electronic government data. In 1976, after consultation with the National Security Agency (NSA), the NBS eventually selected a slightly modified version, which was published as an official Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) for the United States in 1977. The publication of an NSA-approved encryption standard simultaneously resulted in its quick international adoption and widespread academic scrutiny. Controversies arose out of classified design elements, a relatively short key length of the symmetric-key block cipher design, and the involvement of the NSA, nourishing suspicions about a backdoor. The intense academic scrutiny the algorithm received over time led to the modern understanding of block ciphers and their cryptanalysis.<br />Triple DES<br />Triple DES is the common name for the Triple Data Encryption Algorithm (TDEA or Triple DEA) block cipher, which applies the Data Encryption Standard (DES) cipher algorithm three times to each data block.<br />Triple DES provides a relatively easier method of increasing the key size of DES to protect against such attacks, without the need to design a completely new block cipher algorithm.<br />AES (Rijndael)<br />The cipher has a variable block length and key length of 128, 192, or 256 bits to encrypt blocks with a length of 128 bits. The National Institute of Standards and Technology has recently selected the algorithm as an Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).<br />Cryptographic Protocols<br />When you need a security protocol, try to use standard-conforming protocols such as IPSec, SSL, SSH, S/MIME, OpenPGP/GnuPG/PGP, and Kerberos. Each has advantages and disadvantages; many of them overlap somewhat in functionality, but each tends to be used in different areas:</font>