---
id: 289
title: 'LECTURE 8 &#8211; Online Privacy: Using the Internet Safely PART 2'
date: 2015-04-16T14:11:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/04/16/9974097/
permalink: /2015/04/16/9974097/
swp_pinterest_image_url:
  - ""
swp_cache_timestamp:
  - "419230"
view_num:
  - "2"
post_views_count:
  - "354"
bs_social_share_facebook:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_twitter:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_reddit:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_google_plus:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_linkedin:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_interval:
  - "1568521358"
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
<font face="Verdana">Employee monitoring<br />Individuals who access the Internet from work should know that employers are increasingly monitoring the Internet sites that employees visit.&nbsp; Be sure to inquire about your employer&#8217;s online privacy policy.<br />If there is none, recommend that such a policy be developed. If you are unsure of what the policy is or if there is no policy, assume everything you do on your work computer is being monitored.&nbsp;</font>

<font face="Verdana">Government surveillance<br />The government may want your personal information for law enforcement purposes as well as for foreign intelligence investigations.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<br />Law enforcement generally can access your electronic communications and records in two ways: through wiretapping or through subpoena.<br />The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA) provides some protection against government access to email and other online activities.&nbsp; ECPA is a difficult law to understand and apply, because the law relies upon outdated practices and technology.&nbsp; ECPA does reflect a legislative recognition that some Internet activities deserve protection.&nbsp; The difficulty is figuring out to which Internet activities these protections apply.&nbsp; Case law continues to address the proper application of ECPA.<br />Law enforcement can also use a pen/trap tap to get the following information from your ISP:<br />e-mail header information other than the subject line,<br />your IP address,<br />the IP address of computers you communicate with, and<br />possibly a list of all sites you visit.&nbsp;<br />Court Records<br />When you file a lawsuit for divorce or are a party to a civil lawsuit or criminal case, court records are accessible to the public.&nbsp; As the government increasingly moves to eliminate paper records in favor of electronic records, your personal information could end up on the Internet.<br />There are two ways public records are accessible electronically. Some jurisdictions post them on their government websites, thereby providing free or low-cost access to records. Government agencies and courts also sell their public files to commercial data compilers and information brokers. They in turn make them available either online or through special network hookups. The following are examples of public records containing personal information that may be available (availabilty may vary from state to state):<br />Property tax assessor files. Typical records contain name of owner, description of property, and the assessed value for taxation purposes. Some systems even provide blueprints and photographs of the property.<br />Motor vehicle records. Registration, licensing, and driver history information<br />Registered voter files<br />Professional and business licenses<br />Court files<br />Case indexes<br />Tax liens and judgments<br />Bankruptcy files<br />Criminal arrest and conviction records, and warrants<br />Civil court recordings<br />Registered sex offenders</font>

<font face="Verdana">Shopping online<br />Use a credit card for online financial transactions.&nbsp; Debit cards do not provide as much protection from fraud as credit cards. If a criminal uses your debit card, your entire checking account can be wiped out.&nbsp; With a credit card you are able to see the charges before you pay for them, which gives you an opportunity to dispute the charges.&nbsp;</font>

<font face="Verdana">Illegal activity and scams<br />Criminals can capture your information online in various ways, but one distinguishing factor is that in some cases you give them the information yourself. And sometimes criminals use technology to steal your personal information without your knowledge.&nbsp; It is important to recognize that theft occurs both ways.&nbsp;<br />Increasingly these activities may lead to financial losses.&nbsp; Losing money from computer crime can be especially devastating because often it is very difficult to get the money back.&nbsp;<br />Because of the remote nature of the Internet, computer crime presents at least three challenges:<br />Locating the criminal,<br />Finding a court having jurisdiction, and<br />Collecting the money.&nbsp;<br />Although law enforcement is becoming increasingly aware of computer crime, you should largely rely on yourself for protection.&nbsp;<br />Many of these scams are complicated, and criminals are always likely to come up with new tricks to stay ahead of the law.&nbsp; If you are buying over the Internet or setting up online accounts, be aware that these risks are out there.&nbsp;<br />Online auctions.&nbsp; Online auction fraud takes many forms.&nbsp; Some forms of fraud are difficult to avoid, while others can be avoided by taking smart precautions.&nbsp; Fraud can occur when the seller doesn’t ship what was bought or the product is not as good as promised.&nbsp; This type of fraud can be frustrating and hard to avoid.&nbsp; Buyers should pay close attention to fraud alerts posted by the online auction companies.&nbsp; If you pay with a credit card, your credit card company may be able to reimburse you for the fraud.</font>

<font face="Verdana">Malicious Links<br />It is very easy to get duped into clicking on a malicious link. If you click on a malicious link, you will most likely be taken to a site that tricks you into providing personal information that can then be used to steal your money, or even worse, your identity. Clicking on a dangerous link could also cause malware to automatically download onto your computer.<br />Malicious links may look like they were sent by someone you trust, such as:<br />A friend or someone who you know.<br />A legitimate-looking company selling a product or service.<br />A bank or other business that you have an existing account with.<br />Most people think that malicious links arrive by email. But, criminals are finding even sneakier ways to trick you into clicking on a dangerous link. You could receive the malicious link in an instant message, a text message, or on a social networking site like Facebook or Twitter.<br />Malicious links are hard to spot. They often:<br />Are ever-so-slightly misspelled versions of well-known URLs.<br />Use popular URL shortener sites to hide the real URL.<br />Use simple HTML formatting to hide the real URL. This is the most common method for emailed dangerous links. You think you’re clicking on a trustworthy link, but you are redirected to a dangerous link.<br />To protect yourself from malicious links, consider the following tips:<br />Do not click on a link that appears to be randomly sent by someone you know, especially if there is no explanation for why the link was sent, or if the explanation is out of character for the sender (i.e. horribly misspelled or talking about what a great deal they discovered).<br />Do not click on a link that was sent to you by a business you don’t know that is advertising a great deal. Instead, perform an online search for the business, make sure it’s legitimate, and go directly to the business’ website to find the deal yourself.<br />Do not click on a link that was sent to you by a business you have an existing account with. Either go to the business’ site yourself, or call up the business and confirm the legitimacy of the link.<br />Note that some businesses may require that you verify your email address as part of a registration process, which requires you to click on a link contained in an email. Typically, the link will be emailed to you immediately after you register online with the business. It’s a good idea to check your email right after you register with a business.</font>

<font face="Verdana">3: What is Cloud Computing?<br />It is difficult to come up with a precise definition of cloud computing.&nbsp; In general terms, it’s the idea that your computer’s or device&#8217;s applications run somewhere on the “cloud”, that is to say, on someone else’s server accessed via the Internet.&nbsp; Instead of running program applications or storing data on your own device, these functions are performed at remote servers which are connected to your device through the Internet.<br />In telecommunications, a “cloud” is the unpredictable part of any network through which data passes between two end points. &nbsp;In cloud computing the term is used to refer generally to any computer, network or system through which personal information is transmitted, processed and stored, and over which individuals &nbsp;have little direct knowledge, involvement, or control.<br />With more reliable, affordable broadband access, the Internet no longer functions solely as a communications network. &nbsp;It has become a platform for computing. &nbsp;Rather than running software on your own device or server, Internet users reach to the “cloud” to combine software applications, data storage, and massive computing power.&nbsp;<br />It’s interesting to note that cloud computing is really nothing new.&nbsp; It&#8217;s the modern version of the 1960’s-era computer timesharing model.&nbsp; That model was based upon the high cost of computers at that time.&nbsp; With computer and data storage prices plummeting, it seems odd that there would be a return to that sort of model.</font>

<font face="Verdana">Who provides cloud computing services and what services do they provide?<br />It’s a bit easier to understand the concept of cloud computing by providing examples. Google operates several well-known cloud computing services.&nbsp; It offers its users applications such as e-mail, word processing, spreadsheets and storage, and hosts them &#8220;in the cloud&#8221;&#8211;in other words, on its own servers, not yours. &nbsp;So, for example, you can type a document without maintaining any word processing software on your computer or device.&nbsp; You can use Google’s software “in the cloud”.&nbsp; All you need is an Internet capable device.&nbsp;<br />Cloud computing services also may allow you to synchronize files between your Internet accessible devices, so that you can see a file from your home or office computer on a mobile device.&nbsp; Some of best known consumer-oriented cloud services include:<br />Google Drive<br />Dropbox<br />Microsoft Skydrive<br />Apple iCloud<br />Evernote<br />Other examples of cloud computing include:<br />Web-based email services such as Yahoo Mail<br />Web-based office suites such as Google Drive<br />Photo storing services such as Google’s Picassa<br />Spreadsheet applications such as Zoho<br />Online medical records storage such as Microsoft’s HealthVault<br />Social networking sites such as Facebook<br />Applications associated with social networking sites such as Farmville<br />Tax preparation services such as H & R Block<br />Accounting and payroll services such as Intuit<br />The above services are ready to use “out of the box”.&nbsp; In addition, many cloud computing companies offer customized cloud computing services tailored to the specific needs of businesses and other organizations.<br />Some of the major players in cloud computing include:<br />Google&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<br />Yahoo<br />Microsoft<br />Red Hat &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<br />Amazon<br />Salesforce<br />Rackspace<br />Intuit<br />Apple<br />Spider Oak</font>

<font face="Verdana">What are the risks of cloud computing?<br />When users store their data with programs hosted on someone else&#8217;s hardware, they lose a degree of control over their sensitive information.<br />The responsibility for protecting that information from hackers, internal breaches, and subpoenas then falls into the hands of the hosting company rather than the individual user.&nbsp;This can have many possible adverse consequences for users.<br />A growing number of cloud computing providers have experienced serious security breaches, potentially jeopardizing users&#8217; data stored on their servers.&nbsp;<br />For example, in March 2013, the cloud computing provider Evernote announced a hacking incident that exposed user names, passwords, and email addresses.&nbsp; The breach impacted 50 million users.&nbsp;<br />The privacy policy and terms of service of the hosting company should always be read carefully.&nbsp; While generally lengthy and sometimes difficult to understand, they will provide a good outline of what the host can and cannot do with your information.<br />It is important to realize that most privacy policies and terms of service can and do change.&nbsp; In fact, you may not have an opportunity to remove your information from the hosting site before such a change.<br />The location of the host’s operations can significantly impact a user’s rights under the law.&nbsp; The location of the records might not be disclosed in the terms of service or might be changed without notice.&nbsp; This could have substantial legal consequences.<br />Some companies could willingly share sensitive data with marketing firms. So there is a privacy risk in putting your data in someone else&#8217;s hands. Obviously, the safest approach is to maintain your data under your own control.<br />There is also a risk that the host might shut down its operations, declare bankruptcy, or sell the business to another provider.&nbsp; What might happen to your data if that were to happen?<br />Unexpected service disruptions can prevent cloud computer users from accessing their data or performing vital business functions.&nbsp; For example, in June 2010, Intuit suffered a massive site disruption interrupting its Quicken and QuickBooks services.&nbsp; Customers were unable to access Quicken sites for an extended period of time.&nbsp;<br />One of the problems with cloud computing is that technology is frequently light years ahead of the law.&nbsp; There are many questions that need to be answered. &nbsp;<br />Does the user or the hosting company own the data?&nbsp; &nbsp;<br />Can the host deny a user access to their own data? &nbsp;&nbsp;<br />How does the host protect the user’s data?<br />So, before you utilize any cloud computing services, be aware of the potential risks.&nbsp; And make sure that you carefully read the privacy policy and terms of service of the hosting company to become aware of your rights.</font>

<font face="Verdana">Who is legally responsible for data breaches in the cloud?<br />If, through no fault of your own, information stored in the cloud were breached, who would bear responsibility for the consequences?&nbsp;<br />The standard contract from the major cloud providers puts the responsibility for any data loss on the person or business placing the information in the cloud.&nbsp;<br />It might be possible for a large business to negotiate the terms of the standard contract.&nbsp; As a consumer, you probably have no control over whether an organization you do business with places your personal information in the cloud.&nbsp;<br /></font>