---
id: 247
title: CSC 325 REVISION QUESTIONS
date: 2015-04-28T16:21:00+00:00
author: chito
layout: post
guid: http://www.afriqueunique.org/2015/04/28/10131332/
permalink: /2015/04/28/10131332/
swp_pinterest_image_url:
  - ""
swp_cache_timestamp:
  - "419230"
post_views_count:
  - "117"
bs_social_share_facebook:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_twitter:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_reddit:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_google_plus:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_linkedin:
  - "0"
bs_social_share_interval:
  - "1567946429"
categories:
  - LEARNING
---
Revision Questions  
What is a software model?  
Software Model: “A description (textual or visual) of any aspect of a software system such as requirements, architecture, behavior, deployment: the development process model, a requirements model, concurrency model.”  
Software Modeling: “The practice of creating and analyzing software models.”[  
Describe different software models  
Development methodologies are models of how people collaborate to produce software.  
A system design is a model of the structure of classes or modules in a system&#8217;s implementation.  
A flow chart visually models an algorithm&#8217;s logic.  
Pseudo code textually models an algorithm&#8217;s logic.  
Explain the role of software models  
Those who use models to communicate about software  
Those who use models to validate software  
Those who use models to generate software

What is the criteria of software modeling

Describe some statistical packages.&nbsp; Select any of the said packages and demonstrate how they are used

What is simulation  
The imitation of the operation of a real-world process or system over time…  
Most widely used tool (along LP) for decision making  
Usually on a computer with appropriate software  
An analysis (descriptive) tool – can answer what if questions  
A synthesis (prescriptive) tool – if complemented by other tools  
Applied to complex systems that are impossible to solve mathematically

Explain the activities in simulation  
An analysis (descriptive) tool – can answer what if questions  
A synthesis (prescriptive) tool – if complemented by other tools

Compare simulation packages with programming languages  
How are simulation packages classified  
What are NUMERICAL METHODS?  
&nbsp;Algorithms that are used to obtain numerical solutions of a mathematical problem.

&nbsp;Why do we need them?  
&nbsp;1. No analytical solution exists,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 2. An analytical solution is difficult to obtain  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; or not practical.

How is data described in statistics  
What is a variable?  
Describe the various categories of variable  
Describe areas of application of simulation

Define a system  
A set of interacting components or entities operating together to achieve a common goal or objective.

Describe how to study a system  
WHY?  
Measure/estimate performance  
Improve operation  
Prepare for failures

Why is simulation important?  
&nbsp;When mathematical analysis methods are not available, simulation may be the only investigation tool  
&nbsp;When mathematical analysis methods are available, but are so complex that simulation may provide a simpler solution  
&nbsp;Allows comparisons of alternative designs or alternative operating policies  
&nbsp;Allows time compression or expansion

Describe some of the challenges in simulation process  
For a stochastic model, simulation estimates the output while an analytical solution, if available, produces the exact output  
Often expensive and time consuming to develop  
An invalid model may result with confidence in wrong results.

State and explain steps used in simulation

What is software modeling?  
A description (textual or visual) of any aspect of a software system such as requirements, architecture, behavior, deployment: the development process model, a requirements model, concurrency model.

Why do we model software?